add status to the README (#42)
cilium/design-cfps: README.md

# Getting a design approved

> For a CFP to be considered implementable, a Cilium committer needs to aprove it.

Author: ```suggestion
For a CFP to be considered implementable, a Cilium committer needs to approve it.
```

> After their approval, the design can be merged. A merged design proposal 

Reviewer: One of the reasons in other projects we merge proposals in progress and proposals that never make it is as a form of documentation on conversations on why/why the project did something.

I suggest we allow anything that has substantial conversations to be documented in a CFP (i.e. merged) -- even if in the end we decide not to go ahead.

Reviewer: (see my comment below with respect to always filing a feature).

Reviewer 2: I'd like us to encourage this. :+1:

Author: I agree with that too, is there anything else you think we should add to the wording here?

Author: added some suggested wording about dormant and declined also being important and how they can be merged, let me know what you think

means the proposal is viable to be implemented, but not that there is a

> 100% chance the code will be accepted.

Author: ```suggestion
100% chance the code will be accepted. Dormant and declined CFPs are
also an important part of documentation for the project. CFPs with theses
statuses can also be merged with approval from one committer.
```

Reviewer 2: ^ Re: last suggestion, first line already mentions committer approval - no need to mention it twice.

Author: ok, slightly changed around the wording to reflect that

> For a CFP to be considered implementable, a Cilium committer needs to approve it.
> After their approval, the design can be merged. A merged design proposal 
> means the proposal is viable to be implemented, but not that there is a
> 100% chance the code will be accepted.

Author: ```suggestion
A CFP can be merged with the approval of one committer. A CFP merged as implementable means the proposal is viable to be implemented, but not that there is a 100% chance the code will be accepted. Dormant and declined CFPs are also an important part of documentation for the project and should also be merged.
```

there is no expectation that the original design proposal needs to be updated
to reflect these differences.

The code and our documentation are the ultimate sources of truth. CFPs are
the starting point for the implementation, but can also be updated as needed.

> # Status

Reviewer: Might want to reference related projects: https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-architecture/0000-kep-process/README.md

Reviewer: If anything is relevant there, also ref: 

https://gateway-api.sigs.k8s.io/geps/overview/

along with rationale why the states exist.

Author: Good point on your first comment, I've opened an issue for it here https://github.com/cilium/design-cfps/issues/47

that a CFP can have:

1. Draft: A CFP in any form (Google doc, Github issue, ect.) that has not yet
been merged into this repository.

2. Implementable: CFPs that have been approved by one committer and merged into
this repository are given the implementable status. This means that the ideas in the CFP
have been agreed in principle and the coding work can now be started. When merged,
the CFP should be up to date and the relevant stakeholders should be in alignment
even if they are still going through the practical ramifications of how to implement it.

3. Released [Project] X.Y: Everything listed in the CFP as part of the proposal (not future milestones) is merged into the project repository with the listed release.

4. Dormant: This status is given to a CFP that has not been
implemented for a variety of reasons, like not enough engineering cycles or not
currently a focus of the project. Any CFP where there is no active effort to
build the solution can have the dormant status. This serves as a way to preserve
previous discussions on a solution, but where the solution was not yet agreed
upon as implementable. Dormant CFPs can be reactivated

> at any time if there is interest in the project. The next step for a dormant CFP is to amend it to be Implementable.

Author: ```suggestion
at any time if there is interest in the project. The next step for a dormant CFP is to amend it to be Implementable.

5. Declined: This proposal was considered by the community but ultimately rejected.
```

there is no expectation that the original design proposal needs to be updated
to reflect these differences.

The code and our documentation are the ultimate sources of truth. CFPs are
the starting point for the implementation, but can also be updated as needed.

# Status

> The status of a CFP indicates its maturity. There are four different statuses

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The status of a CFP indicates its maturity. There are five different statuses
```

that a CFP can have:

> 1. Draft: A CFP in any form (Google doc, Github issue, ect.) that has not yet

Reviewer: See my comment above -- it would be good to mandate that a Github issue be opened to track progress from Draft state i.e. make it a MUST that there is an issue. This makes it very easy for the project to track all draft proposals that pending (e.g. for triage).

Reviewer 2: Agree. I think we already have this expectation at some level, because the number of the CFP comes from the issue number on the corresponding repository. Even if it's a stub we should just make that part of the standard workflow.

Reviewer 2: (Worth noting though that for any formal CFP there will be a PR in this repository, so tracking feels like it should be relatively straightforward by just listing the open PRs in this repository... but regardless of that I think this is worthwhile.)

Author: updated the wording slightly to make Github issue MUST

> 1. Draft: A CFP in any form (Google doc, Github issue, ect.) that has not yet

Author: ```suggestion
1. Draft: A CFP in any form (Google doc, HackMD, PR, ect.) with associated Github issue that has not yet
```

been merged into this repository.

2. Implementable: CFPs that have been approved by one committer and merged into
this repository are given the implementable status. This means that the ideas in the CFP
have been agreed in principle and the coding work can now be started. When merged,
the CFP should be up to date and the relevant stakeholders should be in alignment
even if they are still going through the practical ramifications of how to implement it.

> 4. Updated: If there have been significant changes been the original CFP and the

Reviewer 2: Not sure how I missed this before but the numbers in this list jump straight from 2 to 4, skipping 3.

> 4. Dormant: This status is given to a CFP that has not been

Reviewer 2: How much effort should we expect authors of dormant CFPs to put into clarifying the status of them?

One of the goals around "Dormant" status is I think to capture ideas that were considered but are not currently a priority. Sometimes these proposals may have aspects which are not agreed upon. While I can see the use of merging a record of the discussion into the repository, I worry a little that we might merge a dormant CFP with aspects that have no consensus, then subsequently someone may pick up the dormant PR and not address the concerns from those aspects with no consensus. The resulting PR might just look like a general tidy-up / improvement of a previous CFP.

Ultimately I guess this would just be up to the rigor of the review for when the status is moved to "Implementable", maybe the answer is that simple - make sure the full CFP has been re-reviewed prior to changing the status.

Reviewer 2: @bowei this is related to [your thread above](https://github.com/cilium/design-cfps/pull/42#discussion_r1702120588), would be curious about your thoughts on this.

Reviewer 2: It looks like at least https://github.com/cilium/design-cfps/pull/7 and https://github.com/cilium/design-cfps/pull/36 are in this category.

Reviewer: Yeah, I think this is a responsibility for the flip to "implementable" -- don't just do it without clear signal the proposal is agreed upon. This is something that would be easy to resolve without added procedure -- it should be hard to have a submarine proposal and anything that wasn't supposed to be merged would probably be backed out at some point with the biggest loss being work...

Author: Agree, I think that is part of the switch to implementable and just requires people to be thoughtful in their reviews

> the CFP is Updated since it has changed signifigantly since it was first merged.

Author: Oh I like this idea, let me write up a suggestion

> 4. Updated: If there have been significant changes been the original CFP and the
> implementation, the CFP should be updated to reflect those changes. The new status of
> the CFP is Updated since it has changed signifigantly since it was first merged.

Author: ```suggestion
4. Implemented, Release X.Y: Everything listed in the CFP as part of the proposal (not future milestones) is merged into the repository with the listed release.
```

Reviewer 2: :ship:

> 5. Dormant: This status is given to a CFP that has not been

Author: ```suggestion
4. Dormant: This status is given to a CFP that has not been
```

> 5. Dormant: This status is given to CFP that have not or did not yet end up being

Reviewer 2: Coming back to this I think this could be more confusing, it'd be clearer to keep dormant something like this. For instance if someone stumbles across a proposal and sees that it's merged with "draft", they wouldn't know if it's active or not. Dormant status makes this more clear.

> 5. Dormant: This status is given to CFP that have not or did not yet end up being

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. Dormant: This status is given to a CFP that has not been
```

> 5. Dormant: This status is given to CFP that have not or did not yet end up being

Reviewer 2: I'm also imagining that we could have a dormant CFP that then later gets resurrected, so someone picks it up, makes proposed changes, re-opens the discussion, then when agreed upon, the dormant CFP moves to implementable.

> 5. Dormant: This status is given to CFP that have not or did not yet end up being

Author: Yea exactly. I think leaving a paper trail that someone can pick up on later if they are interested.

implemented for a variety of reasons, like not enough engineering cycles or not

> currently a focus on of the project. This can be either CFP that were discussed
> but not implemented and the project would like to preserve those discussions for
> future use or CFPs that were deemed implementable, but no one ever got around
> to implementing them and the CFP is now dormant. Dormant CFPs can be reactivated

Reviewer 2: nit: Wording changes just to simplify a bit.
```suggestion
currently a focus of the project. Any CFP where there is no active effort to
build the solution can have the dormant status. This serves as a way to preserve
previous discussions on a solution, but where the solution was not yet agreed
upon as implementable. Dormant CFPs can be reactivated
```

> at any time if there is interest in the project.

Reviewer 2: Could perhaps add something to the effect that "The next step for a dormant CFP is to amend it to be Implementable."

Author: added

> at any time if there is interest in the project.

Author: ```suggestion
at any time if there is interest in the project. The next step for a dormant CFP is to amend it to be Implementable.
```

> 5. Declined: This proposal was considered by the community but ultimately rejected.

Reviewer: Suggest add:

"The community may come back to the proposal in the future but a new CFP should be used. Rejected proposals are useful as documentation on why the given proposal did not make sense."

Reviewer 2: > why the given proposal did not make sense.

How do we document this part?

If there's a PR and it's closed as not planned, I think the UX should be fairly clear. On the other hand, if the PR is merged into the repository, then the PR itself needs to be updated to encode this information. One of the things we've struggled with a bit as we start to establish the CFP process is that for the most part, developers don't want to document what they're designing. If you then decline their proposal and ask them to put additional effort into documenting why, then they're probably not all that motivated to comply. On the other hand, I guess as committers/maintainers we could take on that work, but in that case we also (a) need buy-in from those folks and (b) could benefit from an example workflow that describes what those folks should do in order to document the decision and why we feel it's important (helps with buy-in).

Author: I've updated the wording to "can be" and leaving the implementation that Joe is discussing above to be worked out when we come to that bridge.

Reviewer 2: I think it's worth noting that the default behaviour if we don't resolve that question will be either (a) to leave PRs that have been declined open, or to (b) just close them without merging. Either of these options takes minimal to no effort vs. figuring out the standard we expect in order to merge a declined CFP.

That said, I'm OK with this outcome and we can always improve later, I just want to set expectations that even if we agree in principle that merging declined CFPs is OK, unless we have a specific pattern to follow, we will *not* merge declined PRs.

> 5. Declined: This proposal was considered by the community but ultimately rejected.

Author: ```suggestion
5. Declined: This proposal was considered by the community but ultimately rejected. The community may come back to the proposal in the future but a new CFP should be used. Rejected proposals can be useful as documentation on why the given proposal did not make sense.
```
